BASIC SECURITY SETUP FOR ANDROID GUIDE
======================================

Basic Security Setup for Android guide
--------------------------------------

**Lesson to read: [Mobile Phones](umbrella://lesson/mobile-phones)**\
**Phone requirements:** Android 4.4\
**Level:** Beginner\
**Time required:** 5 minutes

### 1.0 Basic Setup

### 1.1 Access to your phone

**Enable** *Lock SIM card*, found under *Settings -&gt; Personal -&gt;
Security -&gt; Set up SIM card lock*. This will mean that you must enter
a PIN number in order to unlock your SIM card each time your phone is
switched on, with out the PIN no phone calls can be made.

**Set up** a *Screen Lock*, found under *Settings -&gt; Personal -&gt;
Security -&gt; Screen Lock*, which will ensure that a code, pattern or
password needs to be entered in order to unlock the screen once it has
been locked. We recommended using the PIN or Password option, as these
are not restricted by length. You can find more information on creating
strong passwords in the [Passwords lesson](umbrella://lesson/passwords).

**Set** the *security lock timer*, which will automatically lock your
phone after a specified time. You can specify a value which suits you,
depending on how regularly you are willing to have to unlock your phone.

### 1.2 Device Encryption

If your device uses Android version 4.0 or newer, you should **turn
on** *device encryption*. This can be done in *Settings -&gt; Personal
-&gt; Security -&gt; Encryption*. Before you can utilise device
encryption, however, you will be required to set a screen lock password
(described above).

**Note:** Before starting the encryption process, ensure the phone is
fully charged and plugged into a power source.

### 1.3 Network settings

**Turn off** Wi-Fi and Bluetooth by default. Ensure
that *Tethering* and *Portable Hotspots*, under Wireless and Network
Settings, are switched off when not in use. *Settings -&gt; Wireless &
Networks -&gt; More -&gt; Tethering & Mobile hotspot*

If your device supports *Near Field Communication (NFC)*, this will be
switched on by default, and so must be switched off manually.

### 1.4 Location settings

**Switch off** *Wireless* and *GPS* location (under *Location Services*)
and mobile data (this can be found under *Settings -&gt; Personal -&gt;
Location*).

**Note:** Only turn on location settings as you need them. It is
important not have these services running by default in the background
as it reduces the risk of location tracking, saves battery power and
reduces unwanted data streams initiated by applications running in the
background or remotely by your mobile carrier.

### 1.5 Caller Identity

If you want to hide your caller-ID, go to *Phone Dialler -&gt; settings
-&gt; Additional Settings -&gt; Caller ID -&gt; hide number*.

### 1.6 Software Updates

To ensure that you phone remains secure it is strongly recommended to
keep your software updated. There are two types of updates that need to
be checked

The phone operating system: go to: *settings -&gt; About phone -&gt;
updates -&gt; check for updates*

Apps you have installed: Open the **Play store** app, from the *side
menu* select **My Apps**.

**Note:** When updating your phones software it is important to do it
from a trusted location such as your internet connection at home instead
of somewhere like an internet cafe or coffee shop.
