RECUVA TOOL GUIDE
=================

Recuva Tool Guide\
Data recovery and secure deletion
---------------------------------

**Lesson to read:\
? [Backing Up](umbrella://lesson/backing-up)**\
**Download Location:** <http://www.piriform.com/recuva/builds>  \
**Computer requirements:** Any version of Windows\
**Version used in this guide:** Recuva 1.3\
**License:** Freeware\
**Level:** Intermediate\
**Time required:** 20 minutes

**Using Recuva will give you:**\
? The ability to perform different scanning techniques\
? The ability to recover previously deleted files on your computer,
including emails, images and videos\
? The ability to securely delete private or sensitive information

Mac OS users could use [TestDisk and PhotoRec](www.cgsecurity.org/), as
an alternative, which are also compatible with Microsoft Windows and GNU
Linux.

### 1.1 Before you start

In situations where private or sensitive files may have been mistakenly
deleted, Recuva can help you to scan for and restore some of them. As
discussed in the **[Deleting
lesson](umbrella://lesson/safely-deleting)**, a file deleted using the
standard Windows operating system Delete function, even after the
Recycle Bin has been emptied, might still exist on the computer.

However, there are circumstances under which Recuva cannot retrieve
information. If you have permanently deleted or wiped any temporary
files by running CCleaner with the Secure file deletion (Slower) option
enabled, those files are virtually unrecoverable. Recuva cannot recover
files after programs like CCleaner or Eraser have been used to wipe free
disk space or if Windows itself has already overwritten any previously
occupied space. Recuva also cannot recover damaged documents and files.

Recuva can also be used to securely overwrite your private or sensitive
data.

### How to Install Recuva

### 2.0 How to Install Recuva

**Step 1.** Double click ?rcsetup138.exe?; the *Open File - Security
Warning* dialog box may appear. If it does, click ?Run? to activate the
language box.

**Step 2.** Click ?OK? to activate the Welcome to the *Recuva Setup
Wizard* screen.

**Step 3.** Click ?Next? to activate the *License Agreement* screen.
Please read the *License Agreement* before proceeding with the rest of
the installation process.

**Step 4.** Click ?I Agree? to activate the *Choose Install*
Location screen.

**Step 5.** Click ?Next? to activate the *Install Options* screen.

**Note:** The *Install Options* screen appears with the *Install
optional Yahoo! toolbar* option enabled. Do *not* install the Yahoo!
toolbar, which may compromise your Internet privacy and security.

**Step 6.** Check the *Install optional Yahoo! toolbar* check box to
disable it as shown below:

![](tool_recuva1.png)

**Step 7.** Click ?Install? to begin installing Recuva. This will
activate the installation progress bar that will disappear after the
installation has completed itself in a few minutes.

**Step 8.** Click ?Finish? to complete installing Recuva.

Now that you have successfully installed Recuva, you are ready to begin
recovering and/or overwriting private and sensitive information.

### How to Perform Different Scans Using Recuva

### 3.0 Before You Begin

In this section, you will learn how to perform different types of scans,
and be introduced to the *General* and *Actions* tabs in the
*Options* screen. **Note:** A scan will simply retrieve and display the
files which are potentially recoverable. The actual recovery procedures
are discussed in the next section.

### 3.1 How to Perform a Scan Using the Recuva Wizard

The Recuva *Wizard* is recommended in situations where neither the full
nor partial name of the file you would like to recover is known. It is
also recommended if this is the first time you are using Recuva.
The Recuva *Wizard* lets you set the scan parameters by letting you
specify the file type and/or from where the file was deleted.

To begin scanning for deleted files, perform the following steps:

**Step 1.** Click the Recuva icon or select Start &gt; Programs &gt;
Recuva &gt; Recuva to launch the program, and activate the following
screen:

![](tool_recuva2.png)

**Tip:** If you know the exact or even partial name of a file you would
like to recover, click ?Cancel? to go to the *Piriform Recuva* main user
interface, and then follow the steps in section 3.2 How to Perform a
Scan without Using the Recuva Wizard.

**Step 2.** Click ?Next? to activate the following screen:

![](tool_recuva3.png)

The *Recuva Wizard File type* displays a list of different file types,
and describes what files might be recovered when each option is enabled.

**Step 3.** Check the *Other* option, and then click ?Next? to activate
the following screen:

![](tool_recuva4.png)

**Note:** The default setting for the *Recuva Wizard File
Location* screen is the *I'm not sure option*. This option will extend
the scan to all drives as well as removable media, except CDs, DVDs and
optical media. It may, therefore, require a longer time to generate
results.

Files are most frequently deleted from Recycle Bin in
the Windows operating systems, to minimize the chance of your
accidentally deleting private or sensitive information.

**Step 4.** Check the *In the Recycle Bin* option as shown above, and
then click ?Next? to activate the following screen:

![](tool_recuva5.png)

**Note:** For this exercise, do not enable the *Deep Scan* option. This
scanning technique will be discussed in section 3.3 How to Perform a
Deep Scan.

**Step 5.** Click ?Start? to begin recovering your deleted files.

During the file recovery process, two progress status bars appear in
quick succession. The *Scanning the drive for deleted files* progress
bar lists the deleted files. The *Analyzing the file contents* progress
bar groups and sorts the deleted files into file types and degree of
recoverability. They also display the duration of the scanning and
analysis processes. Your *Piriform Recuva* main user interface may then
resemble the following screen:

![](tool_revua6.png)

The *Piriform Recuva* main user interface lists information about each
deleted file, arranged in six columns. Each column is described as
follows:

**Filename** This displays the name and file extension of the deleted
file. Click the *Filename* title to arrange the deleted files in
alphabetical order.

**Path:** This displays where the deleted file was found. Given that
the *In the Recycle Bin* option was enabled in this example, the file
path is *C:RECYCLER* for all the deleted files. Click the *Path* title
to view all the files listed under a particular directory or file path.

**Last modified:** This displays the last time the file was modified
before it was deleted, and can be useful in helping to identify the file
you would like to recover. Click *Last modified* to list the deleted
files according to the oldest or most recent.

**Size:** This displays the size of the file. Click *Size* to list the
deleted files beginning with the largest or smallest deleted file.

**Status:** This displays the extent to which the file is recoverable,
and corresponds to the file status icons discussed
below. Click *Status* to sort the deleted files into the three basic
categories, and list them from *Excellent* to *Unrecoverable*.

**Comment:** This displays why a given file may or may not be
recoverable, and the extent to which a deleted file has been overwritten
in the Windows Master File Table. Click *Comment* to view the extent to
which a file or group of files have been overwritten.

Each file is associated with a coloured status icon which indicates the
extent to which each file can be successfully recovered:

The following list describes each status icon:

? Green: The chances for a full recovery are excellent.\
? Orange: The chances for recovery are acceptable.\
? Red: The chances for recovery are unlikely.

### 3.2 How to Perform a Scan without Using the Recuva Wizard

To access the Recuva main user interface directly, (that is, not use
the *Recuva Wizard*), perform the following steps:

**Step 1.** Click the Recuva icon or select Start &gt; Programs &gt;
Recuva &gt; Recuva.

**Step 2.** Check the *Do not show this Wizard on startup* option,
then click ?Cancel? to activate the following screen:

![](tool_recuva7.png)

The *Piriform Recuva* main user interface is divided into the results
pane on the left and the *Preview*, *Info* and *Header* tabs in which to
sort and view information about a specific deleted file. It lets you set
certain scan options, similar to those in the *Recuva Wizard*.

**Step 3.** Click to activate the drop-down list and select the drive to
be scanned; the *Local Disk (C:)* is the default and used in this
example as follows:

![](tool_recuva8.png)

The *Filename* or *path* drop-down list lets you specify the kind of
file you are looking for, and loosely corresponds to the *Recuva Wizard
File type* screen.

![](tool_recuva9.png)

The *Filename* or *path* feature is a combination of a text box and
drop-down list. It has two main uses: To let you directly search for a
specific file, and/or to sort through a list of deleted files, according
to file type.

Alternatively, the *Filename* or *path* feature can be used to search
for files of a specific type, or to sort through a general list of
deleted files in the results pane.

To begin scanning for a file of which all or part of the name is known,
perform the following steps:

**Step 1.** Type in the name or partial name of a file you would like to
recover as follows (in this example, the file *triangle.png* is being
scanned):

![](tool_recuva10.png)

Tip: Click X to reset the *File name and path* (which appear greyed
out).

**Step 2.** Click ?Scan? to begin scanning for your deleted file(s);
shortly thereafter, a screen will appear resembling the following:

![](tool_recuva11.png)

### 3.3 How to Perform a Deep Scan Using Recuva

The *Enable Deep Scan* option lets you conduct a more thorough scan;
naturally, a deep scan takes a longer time, depending on your computer
speed and the number of files you have. This option might prove useful
if your initial scan does not display the files you would have liked to
recover. Although a deep scan may even take hours depending on the
amount of data stored on your computer, it may improve your chances of
recovering the files you require.

The Recuva *Deep Scan* option can be enabled either
through checking the *Enable Deep Scan* option in the *Recuva Wizard*.

**Step 1.** Click ?Options? to activate the *Options* screen,
then click the *Actions* tab as follows:

![](tool_recuva12.png)

**Step 2.** Check the *Deep Scan (increases scan time)* option,
then click ?OK?.

**Step 3.** Click ?Scan? to begin scanning for deleted files using
the *Deep Scan* option. As mentioned earlier, a deep scan can
potentially take a few hours, depending on the size of your hard disk
and computer speed:

![](tool_recuva13.png)

### 3.4 An Introduction to the Options Screen

In this section, you will learn how to use the different settings to
successfully recover and overwrite your private or sensitive information
in the *Options* screen. To configure these settings, perform the
following steps:

**Step 1:** Click ?Options? to activate the following screen:

![](tool_recuva14.png)

The *Options* screen is divided into
the *General*, *Actions* and *About* tabs.

The *General* tab lets you define a number of important settings,
including *Language* (Recuva supports 37 languages), *View mode* and
disabling or enabling the *Recuva Wizard*.

![](tool_recuva15.png)

The View Mode lets you select how you would like to view the deleted
files, and can also be enabled whenever you right click a file in
the *Piriform Recuva*.

? **List:** This option lets you view the deleted files in a list\
? **Tree:** This option lets you view the directory path of deleted
files in the form of an expandable tree.\
? **Thumbnails:** This option lets you view the deleted files as
graphics or images where possible.

Most importantly perhaps, the *Advanced* section of the *General* tab
lets you set the number of times your data can be overwritten by random
data to protect it from recovery by hostile or malicious parties.

The *Secure overwriting* drop-down list displays four options for
overwriting your private information. Its default mode is *Simple
Overwrite (1 pass)*. A pass refers to the number of times your document,
file or folder will be overwritten with random data to render it
completely unreadable.

**Step 2: Select** the *DOD 5220.22-M (3 passes)* option as follows:

![](tool_recuva16.png)

A single pass may prove quite effective in overwriting a given document,
file or folder; however, there are parties with the resources and skills
to recover a relatively light secure overwrite. Three passes is a solid
balance between the time required to perform a secure overwrite, and the
ability to recover that document, file or folder.

**Step 3.** Click ?OK? to save your *General* tab configuration options.

![](tool_recuva17.png)

? **Show files found in hidden system directories:** This option lets
you display files in hidden system directories.

? **Show zero-byte files:** This option lets you show you files that
have little to no content, and which are basically irrecoverable.Show
securely deleted files: This option lets you display files that have
been securely deleted in the results pane.

**Note:** If you have already used CCleaner or a similar program, it
changes the filename to ZZZZZZZ.ZZZ when it securely deletes a file, for
security reasons.

? **Deep Scan:** This option lets you scan the entire drive for the
deleted document or file; if previous scans have proven ineffective in
locating your file, the Deep Scan may prove useful. However, it does
require more time. Please refer to section 3.3 How to Perform a Deep
Scan Using Recuva.

? **Scan for non-deleted files (for recovery from damaged or reformatted
disks):** This option lets you attempt to recover files from disks that
may have sustained physical damage or software-related corruption.

The *About* tab displays version information, as well as links to the
Piriform web site.

Now that you are more confident about performing different scans and
familiar with the settings in the *General* and *Actions* tabs in
the Options screen, you are ready to learn how to actually recover
and/or securely overwrite your private or sensitive information.

### How to Recover and Securely Overwrite Files Using Recuva

### 4.0 Before You Begin

In this section, you will learn how to recover a previously deleted
file, as well as how to securely overwrite any private or sensitive
information.

Recuva lets you create a new folder for storing your recovered files.
Although Recuva does let you use existing folders, for reasons of safety
and security, we recommend that you copy your recovered files to a
removable device like a backup drive or USB memory stick.

**Important:** Although Recuva does an excellent job of securely
overwriting information, it may leave a file marker indicating the
existence of such a file. To protect your privacy and security, it makes
sense to save any important, private or sensitive information to a
removable device, and not to the original location or path.

### 4.1 How to Recover a Deleted File

To begin recovering a deleted file, perform the following steps:

**Step 1.** Connect your removable disk or a USB memory stick to your
computer.

**Step 2.** Check the check box next to a file you want to recover to
enable the Recover... button or double click that file to both
check and highlight that file.

**Step 3.** Click ?Recover?? to activate the *Browse For Folder* screen.

**Step 4.** Select a destination and then click ?Make New Folder? to
create your recovery folder as shown below.

![](tool_recuva18.png)

**Note:** In this example, the folder for storing your recovered
documents and files has been given an obvious label. However, keeping
your digital privacy and security in mind, we encourage you to be more
careful in labelling your own folder.

**Step 5.** Click ?Yes? to begin the file recovery process; a progress
status screen appears as follows:

![](tool_recuva19.png)

After the files have been recovered, a confirmation will appear
resembling the following screen:

![](tool_recuva20.png)

**Note:** Recuva supports multiple file recovery. Simply check the check
boxes of the files you would like to recover and perform steps
**3** to **5**.

Now that you are comfortable with recovering a previously deleted file,
you are ready to learn how to use the pop-up menu to perform multiple
file recoveries and secure overwriting of files.

### 4.2 How to Use the Pop-up Menu

Recuva offers different options for selecting the documents, files or
folders you would like to delete or securely overwrite.

? **Checking** is generally used to quickly select several
non-contiguous or separate files for recovery or secure overwriting.\
? **Highlighting** is generally used to quickly select contiguous
multiple files in a block or group for recovery or secure overwriting.

Right click on a deleted file displayed in the Recuva main to activate
the following pop-up menu:

![](tool_recuva21.png)

**Recover Highlighted:** This item lets you recover all or any
highlighted deleted file(s).

**Recover Checked:** This item lets you recover a checked deleted file.

**Check Highlighted:** This item lets you check a highlighted deleted
file.

**Uncheck Highlighted:** This item lets you uncheck a highlighted
deleted file.

As you recall, the View Mode can also be set in the *General* tab in
the *Options* screen. This item lets you select how you would like to
view the deleted files.

? **List:** This option lets you view the deleted files in a list as
in Figure 5\
? **Tree:** This option lets you view the directory path of deleted
files in the form of an expandable tree.\
? **Thumbnails:** This option lets you view the deleted files as
graphics or images where possible.

**Highlight Folder:** This option lets you select multiple deleted files
according to their directory path, and lets you perform the actions
listed in the pop-up menu on them.

**Secure Overwrite Highlighted:** This option lets you securely
overwrite a highlighted deleted file.

**Secure Overwrite Checked:** This option lets you securely overwrite a
checked deleted file, changing its status icon to red.

### 4.3 How to Securely Overwrite a Deleted File

To securely overwrite a deleted file, perform the following steps:

**Step 1.** Check the individual file you would like to have securely
overwritten, and then right click the check box it to activate the
pop-up menu.

**Step 2.** Select ?Secure Overwrite Checked? to activate the following
confirmation dialog box:

![](tool_recuva22.png)

**Step 3.** Click ?Yes? to begin the overwriting process; depending on
the size and status of the file as well as the *Secure
overwriting* option you selected in the *General* tab in
the *Options* screen, this could take some time. After the overwriting
process has been completed, a screen resembling the following appears:

![](tool_recuva23.png)

You have successfully completed recovering and securely overwriting
files using Recuva previously deleted files.

### 5 PORTABLE RECUVA

### 5.1 Differences between the Installed and Portable Versions of Recuva

Given that portable tools are not installed on a local computer, their
existence and use may remain undetected. However, keep in mind that your
external device or USB memory stick, and portable tools are only as safe
as the computer you are using, and may risk being exposed to adware,
malware, spyware and viruses.

There are no other differences between Portable Recuva and the version
designed to be installed.

### 5.2 How to Download and Extract Recuva Portable

To begin downloading and extracting Recuva Portable, perform the
following steps:

**Step 1.** Click <http://www.piriform.com/recuva/download/portable> to
be directed to the appropriate download site, and automatically activate
the following screen:

**Step 2.** Click ?OK? to save the *rcsetup140.zip* installation file to
your computer; and then navigate to it.

**Step 3.** Right click to activate the Windows pop-up menu, and
then select the Extract files... item as shown below:

![](tool_recuva24.png)

**Step 4.** Navigate to the removable drive or USB memory stick as shown
below, and then click ?New Folder? to create a new folder in which to
extract the installation file.

![](tool_recuva25.png)

**Step 5.** Enter a name for the new folder in the document tree as
shown below:

![](tool_recuva26.png)

Alternatively, you may type in a folder name in the accompanying
drop-down list: 

![](tool_recuva27.png)

**Note:** Although for the purposes of this example, the new folder is
entitled Recuva Portable, users may choose different name.

**Step 6.** Click ?OK? to begin extracting its contents to newly created
folder.

**Step 7.** Navigate to your destination external drive or USB memory
stick, as shown below, then open it to confirm that the Portable
Recuva program was successfully extracted.

![](tool_recuva28.png)

**Step 8.** Double click *Recuva.exe* to activate the Portable
Recuva wizard.

Please refer to the rest of the Recuva tool guide above to begin
configuring and using it.
